# AmericanK12ShootingData
# Abstract
This project aims to determine the main factors that have direct effects on the severity and characteristics of school shootings in the United States, drawing data extracted from an online dataset of American school shooting statistics [1]. The data is derived from the K-12 School Shooting Database, a collection of individual shooting incidents accompanied with their respective details (such as location, motivations, time, etc.) [1].  The data utilized in our project spans over 50 years, consisting of school shooting data collected from 1970 to the present day [1]. A Random Forest Regressor Model will be utilized to analyze and predict future school shooting data based on the decision trees generated from previously existing data. The performance of these models were also evaluated in our project. Visualizations of existing data were also created to convey observable characteristics and trends present in the existing dataset.  

# Introduction
School shootings are a rampant problem in the United States. Gun violence is the leading cause of death among American children and teens [2]. In fact, an average of 12 children die from gun violence in America every day [2]. Therefore, the issue of gun violence in American schools is highly concerning, and it is a persistent scourge amongst American students at the k-12 level. ​
Our problem is the issue of school shootings in the United States. We are curious as to the underlying reasons that may have aggravated this issue. For example, how can legislation and government action encourage or discourage the frequency of school shootings? Is there a correlation between states with differing levels of gun control and the rates of gun violence in those states? What are the motivating reasons that drive school shooters to choose violence?​
As partners, we took note of the fact that each member of our group had varying perspectives and motivations for choosing to research the topic of gun violence in American schools. More specifically, our group consisted of individuals with American as well as international upbringings. One member of our group is a second-generation Chinese-American immigrant, who was raised as a typical American student and was no stranger to the news of violence and school shootings amongst elementary and high school students growing up. He was always curious as to how and why America’s gun problem was so bad, especially because many foreigners have virtually nonexistent rates of school shootings in their respective countries relative to the United States, and he believed that quantifying and visualizing school shooting data would help Americans find a better solution to this problem. From a different perspective, another group member is an international student from Taiwan, and she could not comprehend the scale of gun violence in the United States. Without being exposed to the American educational environment at a young age, she was curious about the root causes of shootings in the United States.​

​# Related Works
Gunfire on School Grounds in the United States showcases a map that is kept up-to-date with visualizations of school shooting locations and fatality rates. The user can also filter by year to isolate specific incidences [4].​
The Sandy Hook Promise is a nonprofit organization that was formed in the wake of the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School Shooting. Their website raises awareness of shocking school shooting statistics and utilizes minimalist infographics to showcase this data [2]. 

# Methodology
We started with creating a pandas data frame from the initial database, which was a .csv file containing a wide variety of specifications and details concerning school shootings. Once our data frame was created, we proceeded by choosing several specific columns we need from the dataset, particularly the 'Victims Killed', 'Victims Wounded', 'Number Victims', 'Date', 'Shooter Killed', 'City', 'State', and 'School Level' columns. We deemed these attributes to be the most relevant for our project, specifically because we believed that predicting future shooting fatalities and severities would certainly warrant the number of victims being killed or wounded in shootings. We also wanted to keep track of the dates of shootings in our data frame to make a visualization of shootings over the past 50 years in a chart, and we kept the School Level and Situation columns for contextual reasons; we believed it to be crucial to keep these fields in the case we wanted to investigate trends or patterns that recurred in past school shootings. To do this, we selected only the previously mentioned columns and dropped all the other columns in the table. Then, to clean the data of null values, we selected the rows that contained “NaN” data types, then made the decision to either impute our data or to delete it. Since we concluded that not much data would be lost from absolute deletion, we dropped the total number of rows from 2159 to 2135 by deleting any rows that showed a null value. Some data types were generic Object types, so we changed the data types to be more suitable, such as changing the type of “Date” from 'object' to a datetime datatype.​
Once our data was cleaned and formatted the way that we wanted it to be, we first created two visualizations depicting the total number of k-12 shooting cases by year. ​
To do this, we utilized a simple for loop to iterate through the years of the dataset, then grouped together the cases of shootings by year by taking the length of each array of shootings that occurred each year and paired it with an array of years that were collected. From these arrays we were able to plot a regression model as well as a bar plot to visualize the aggregate number of shootings that occurred each year. ​
From there, we went ahead and utilized three different types of tools to predict future data and make conclusions about the data we had extracted from our original set:​
Decision Tree Classifier: ​
 To construct our decision tree, we grouped the number of shootings in each individual state by year, by returning the value counts of school shooting cases in the data frame that shared Year and State. We then created dummy variables based on State, with a 1 indicating a shooting that had occurred in a State and a 0 indicating no shooting. From there we built training and test sets from our dummy variable data frame and built a decision tree from our training set. ​
K-Nearest Neighbor:​
Next, we decided that utilizing a k-nearest neighbor algorithm would be a simple and effective way to predict data for our model, so we proceeded by building a k-neighbors classifier model with k=5 from our training sets.​
Random Forest Classifier:​
A Random Forest was also constructed using our same training set from earlier. We set the number of trees to be equal to 50 and seeded the random state to be 7. Then the predict method of this Forest was called.​

# Results and Evaluation
After constructing the relevant models and predictions from our prepared data frame, we were able to better visualize the data that was presented to us. Firstly, the regression model as well as the bar graph showed a worrying trend of gun violence in k-12 schools. The regression model quite clearly displays a positive relationship between the number of school shootings and the current year, which is highly alarming, as this implies that cases of gun violence in American schools are only continuing to increase as time goes on. The bar graph conveys the same idea, only without any sort of predictions or fitting; we can see a visible uptick in cases of school shootings from 2010 onwards. ​
When it came to producing predictive models for our data, we focused primarily on Year, State, and the total shooting cases (an aggregation of shootings that occurred in each state per year). After setting aside testing and training data, we built Random Forest Classifier as well as Decision Tree Classifier models to make predictions about our data. For our Random Forest, we ended up getting an accuracy of 0.41 when our testing data was tested against the predictor constructed from our training data. Changing the number of trees had no effect; the accuracy remained at 0.41 at different numbers of trees. For the Decision Tree Classifier, an accuracy of 0.57 was attained from the model. Changing the number of estimators caused the accuracy to fluctuate, but accuracy remained around the 0.56 to 0.57 range for predictions. When it came to the K-neighbors classifier, we found the accuracy of predictions to be 0.52 when k was set to 4. When we utilized a for loop to iterate through a range of neighbors, we found that the accuracy of the K-neighbors classifier tended to decrease as the number of neighbors used to make predictions increased. Therefore, the optimal number of neighbors to use to predict from our data set was concluded to be 4. ​​
​
# Impact
The data and analysis that we performed on the data would be vital in spreading awareness as well as providing guidance to public officials and those who are actively involved in the fight against school shooting violence in the United States. A real-world example of an organization that has had real life impact on the same exact issue would be the Sandy Hook Promise. This organization extracted data from a variety of credible sources, including the New England Journal of Medicine as well as the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention [2]. Advocates for the Sandy Hook Promise have also started initiatives such as the Say Something program, which encourages students to recognize early warning signs of violence and harm at schools [2].  As a result of the publication of these statistics and implementation of these programs, the Sandy Hook Promise has helped prevent at least 96 incidents of violence at American schools since its origins [2]. We have also successfully constructed models that both visualize the worrying trend of school shooting violence nationwide to spread awareness, as well as create machine learning models that predict the State where shootings are expected to occur when given a range of characteristics, such as fatalities and school level.​
​
# Conclusion
Throughout the course of this project, we were able to successfully isolate certain variables we deemed relevant to the prevalence of school shootings by state [1]. Thus, we were able to predict the State that a future shooting was most likely to occur in given a variety of conditions that were detected to correlate with State. This helped us towards our goal of determining which states were more susceptible to school shooting violence and the reasons why [1]. Having a larger sample size would of course provide better predictions and analysis, as more data being provided to the training sets of our code would make for improved accuracy and thus better machine learning algorithms that would predict information about future school shootings in the United States [1].​

# References
1. Database, K-12 School Shooting. “12 School Shooting Database.” K, 2022, https://k12ssdb.org/all-shootings. ​
2.“16 Facts about Gun Violence and School Shootings.” Sandy Hook Promise, 16 Sept. 2022, https://www.sandyhookpromise.org/blog/gun-violence/16-facts-about-gun-violence-and-school-shootings/. ​
3. Collins, Dave. “Alex Jones Ordered to Pay $965 Million for Sandy Hook Lies.” AP NEWS, Associated Press, 13 Oct. 2022, https://apnews.com/article/shootings-school-connecticut-conspiracy-alex-jones-3f579380515fdd6eb59f5bf0e3e1c08f. ​
4. Research, Everytown. “The Long, Shameful List of Gunfire on School Grounds in America.” Everytown Research & Policy, 21 Oct. 2022, https://everytownresearch.org/maps/gunfire-on-school-grounds/. ​

​
